Source: https://chesstempo.com/manual/en/manual.pdf (ChessTempo User Guide), Chapter 17 'Opening Training', extracted with pdftotext -layout on 2026-09-11

Chapter 17. Opening Training
The Opening trainer allows you to create and manage an opening repertoire, and then train to
learn the moves using spaced repetition and other drilling modes. The opening repertoire also
integrates into the Play online feature by providing immediate post-game feedback on where your
games deviated from your opening repertoire.


17.1. Getting started
To start opening training you first need to create a new repertoire. Click on the [ New repertoire ]
button to create your first repertoire. Repertoires can be either black or white repertoires, so
choose a repertoire name and colour and click the [ Create ] button. If you already have a
repertoire in PGN format, you can also import your repertoire from PGN by clicking on the
[ Import PGN ] button.

To add new moves to your repertoire simply make the move on the board and it will be added to
the currently selected repertoire. When you have some moves entered, you can enter training
mode by clicking on the [ Train ] or [ Train branch ] buttons. [ Train branch ] will only train
moves from under the currently selected move in the opening tree panel. See the training mode
section for more details on training.

You may also want to explore the different settings that can be used to control training and viewing
your repertoire. Settings can be viewed by clicking on the blue circle menu under the board and
then clicking on the settings icon.


17.2. PGN import
When creating a new repertoire, you can use an existing PGN file as the import source. If there are
multiple games in your PGN file , and the file is not the result of a Chesstempo opening repertoire
export, then each game will be interpreted as multiple lines for the same imported repertoire.

By default, any comments from your repertoire will be imported as private comments. If you’d like
your PGN comments to be visible to others or ignored completely, you can choose those options on
the create repertoire dialog. NOTE: If you are using a PGN with comments made by someone else,
such as a chess book author, please do not make the comments public. If you are an author and find
any of your annotations being used in comments on Chesstempo, please contact us to have them
removed.

By default, any alternative moves at the same position for the colour of your repertoire will be
imported disabled, but you can choose to have them imported enabled as alternative lines to train
or not imported at all.

There is no size limit on the PGN, but there are quotas for the total number of positions you are
able to have across all your repertoires. For details on the quotas which differ by membership type ,
please see the Chesstempo memberships page.

The quota for free accounts is fairly generous (currently 20000 positions can be stored). However
you should be careful when importing repertoires that you are not trying to import a large



168
collection of games. Loading repertoires made up of entire games, including the middle game and
endgame parts of each game will eat up your quota very quickly with positions that are not useful
for training purposes.


17.3. Adding repertoire moves
You can enter a new move for a repertoire any time you are not in training mode by playing the
move on the board. Played moves are automatically stored in your repertoire, and saved on the
server. Moves will be attached to the currently selected repertoire which is shown in the repertoire
tree to the left of the board.

To delete moves (or branches of moves) right click on the move in the opening tree and choose the
delete option. Deleting a non-final move in a line will also remove all sub-moves and variations that
appear after that move.


               Note if you are deleting a line that other moves could have transposed into you
               will also be truncating those transposition lines as you will be removing the moves
               from the line they transposed into. If you want to delete a line holding transposed
               moves that you would like to preserve, then promote the truncated tranposing line
               first, and this will move the following moves into the promoted transposing line
               and out of the line you plan to delete. You can then delete the moves left in the
               demoted line (which will now be marked as the truncated transposing line)
               without losing the moves that are now attached to the newly promoted
               transposition destination line. When promoting lines holding transpositions, you
               may need to reload the opening trainer page in order for the canonical line to be
               shown as moved in the interface.


17.3.1. Changing main line

Most repertoires will have positions where your opponent has multiple choices, and in some cases
you may have more than one move you want to play in a position. The first move shown in the
opening tree will be the main line move, and the subsequent moves in the sub-positions will be
seen as sub-lines. If you’d like to change the order of lines you can right click on a sub-line in the
opening tree and use the promote line option. The line will move up in order, swapping with the
next highest line. If the line was one below the main line, then it will swap with the main line, and
become the new main line move for that positions. When promoting lines holding transpositions,
you may need to reload the opening trainer page in order for the canonical line to be shown as
moved in the interface.


17.4. Training mode
Training mode is where you practice the moves in your repertoire. Training mode can be entered
by clicking on the [ Train ] or [ Train branch ] buttons. [ Train branch ] will only train moves from
under the currently selected move in the opening tree.




                                                                                                  169
17.4.1. Move hints

By default if you are seeing a move for the first time you’ll be shown an arrow indicating the
correct move. Similarly if you have turned on the preview moves wrong on last attempt option in
your settings, and are seeing a move you got wrong last time you’ll also see an arrow showing the
correct move.


17.4.2. Training depth

If you want to focus only on moves from lines up to a particular depth , then you can set the
Maximum learning depth in your opening trainer settings. When a maximum depth is set , the
summary stats shown under the board will reflect the current depth limit. NOTE: Graphs showing
training status always use the full depth when displaying data.

The training depth option can be used to create a good compromise between the main lines first
and breadth over depth learning priority settings. With main lines first selected, you can end up
having to learn some very deep lines before seeing any side branches further up the tree. By setting
a maximum depth you can force the main line learning priority to start to select side lines earlier
than would otherwise be the case, creating a hybrid priority between main line and breadth over
depth options.


17.4.3. Available Training Modes

The opening trainer currently provides the following training modes that can be selected in the
opening trainer settings.

1. Spaced repetition

2. Review in order

3. Least recent/unseen first


Spaced repetition

Spaced repetition is a learning method that tries to optimize your time so less time is spent on items
you know well, and more time is spent on items that are causing trouble. Once a move is first
served up for training it is given a scheduled time for its next appearance. If you continue to get the
move correct, the next scheduled time will be moved further and further into the future. If you get
the move incorrect the system will decide you have forgotten the move and will start to present it
more frequently. This process of serving up mistakes more quickly, and delaying the reappearance
of correct moves allows you to maximize the time you spend on the moves you are having the most
problem remembering.

When you get a move wrong, you are shown the correct move and can then play it to advance on to
the next scheduled move. If you choose to play the move at this point it will not be considered a
correct response for the purposes of the spaced repetition system, so will not impact how soon you
will see the mistake again.

Incorrect moves are by default scheduled almost immediately for review. This means as soon as
you finish all the moves that were already scheduled due when you started your current training
session, you’ll be able to review the mistakes you made during the session.


170
Learning priority order

Before you begin training, none of your moves will be scheduled. Any time there are no moves
scheduled and you start training when there are still moves left that have not been scheduled, the
system will select an as yet unseen move and from that point will start to schedule it using the
spaced repetition system.

There are four ways of selecting how the system chooses which of the unseen moves from your
repertoire will be used first, and these are controlled via the Learning priority setting in your
opening training settings. The default method is the "Depth first" method which tries to traverse
your repertoire in a depth first manner. Most repertoires will have multiple lines for your
opponent in many positions, and in some cases for your own moves. The "Depth first" option will
start with the first main line, go as deep as possible in that line, before selecting the first variation
of that main line and training all the moves in that line, before selecting the first variation off the
initial variation. This process of going to the end of the current line and then repeating the process
on sub-lines is repeated at all levels until the entire repertoire has been covered.

The "Breadth over depth" is the opposite of the "Depth first" option. Instead of going deep first, it
will investigate your repertoire looking broadly, before going deep. So this option will look at all the
moves in the first position in your repertoire, then all the moves at move 2, and then all the moves
at move 3 across all branches of your repertoire. This option allows you to get a broad but shallow
view of your repertoire, prioritising a broad range of knowledge before moving to deeper material.

The "Main lines first" option will train the main lines before side lines. When all the main lines are
done it will start to look at the first sub-lines in each position. This option works by viewing your
repertoire as variation levels. The top level main line is level 1. A variation that branches off that
main line will be level 2, and a variation that branches off that level 2 variation will be level 3. This
option will first show you all the level one moves, then all the moves in level 2 variations, then only
after those have been covered, all the level 3 variations will be shown. This process continues down
the levels, until the most deeply nested variation moves have been visited. This method provides a
mid-way point between breadth over depth and depth first approaches. By making sure you place
the most important lines as possible in the main lines or main variations when constructing your
repertoire, this method will allow you to choose to train those most important lines first, and only
start to tackle the more nested levels of variations after mastering the more popular variations.

The "Common positions first" option will use the opening explorer data that has been synced with
the repertoire in order to prioritise moves that have been played more often in the source games
over moves played less often. Moves that have no opening explorer data associated with them will
not be used until all moves with opening explorer data have been used, at that point moves with no
opening explorer data, but having engine evaluations will use engine evaluations to prioritise
learning order, and for moves with neither opening data nor engine evaluation data, breadth first
order will be used as a fall back method for prioritisation . See the syncing opening explorer stats
and syncing engine evals sections for further details on how to attach opening explorer and engine
evaluations to repertoire moves. NOTE: This is a desktop only feature until the next app update.


               Learning priority settings only impact which moves are taken from an unseen
               state into a scheduled state, an operation that only occurs in spaced repetition
               mode when you elect to continue training when no moves already being trained
               are scheduled. For moves already scheduled, the spaced repetition system rather



                                                                                                     171
               than the learning priority will dictate which moves are selected. Eventually you
               will reach a state where all moves have been introduced into training and are
               scheduled for training. At that point, the main lines first and breadth over depth
               options will not be relevant again until you add new moves into your repertoire.

               If you would like to train all positions using the learning priority order rather than
               the spaced repetition scheduling algorithm’s choice for move order on moves
               you’ve already seen once, then choose the review in order learning mode insted of
               spaced repetition mode, as it will using the learning priority method to determine
               the order, allowing you to train the entire repertoire in the chosen order
               irrespective of the spaced repetition scheduling state.


Context for training moves

When a move is scheduled for training (or added from the set of unseen moves), the system may
choose to add some context moves to help orientate you to the position. Once you have a large
repertoire, it can be confusing to jump from random position to random position without any
context.

To determine how much context is shown, the system looks at the full line from the move chosen
for display up to the start position in the game. If the moves are extremely well known the system
may skip them completely, if they are somewhat less known the system will choose to display them
as context, with how well known dictating how fast the system will move through the moves. This
enables the system to provide you some context, but make sure you are not wasting your time
seeing context that is already second nature to you. The system may also decide that a move that
appears earlier in the line than the move that is chosen for display was close to being scheduled,
and so present that move as a training move before reaching the target move. This further
optimizes the use of context by using the context to present more than one training target from the
context line for training. There are several settings to control the context behaviours in your
opening trainer settings, including options that can be used to make the system ask you to play ALL
the leadup context moves.


Review in order

Review in order mode allows you go through an entire repertoire (or repertoire branch) in order,
bypassing the scheduling algorithm used by the default spaced repetition learning mode. The order
chosen will be the same as that chosen by the Learning priority order setting. Each repertoire will
keep track of the current review position, and once you’ve reached the end of order, the order will
reset and start again. This mode is designed for use in situations where you want a review of all
your moves, such as before a tournament. Any attempts made in review mode will also impact
spaced repetition scheduling, so if you get a move wrong in review mode, when you return to
spaced repetition mode, it will be recognised as a move requiring more work. Similarly, correct
responses in review mode will increase the time for an item to be later scheduled in spaced
repetition mode. Any moves in your repertoire that had previously not been seen will move out of
unseen status into learning status when encountered in review mode.

Note that review mode aims for you to play all moves in your repertoire only once during the
review. This means when you reach the end of the line, the system will autoplay any moves leading
up to the next move that you have already played during this review cycle.



172
We don’t recommend using review mode as your main training mode as it will not make the most
efficient use of your training time, due to not priotising your time on items you know least well. So
leaving review mode for situations where a complete review of a repertoire (or repertoire branch)
is required is probably best.

To reset the review to the start position, go to the 'Resert' option in the opening trainer actions
menu, and then click the [ Reset Review Order ] button.


Least recent/unseen first

Least recent/unseen first is similar to review in order mode. However instead of reiviewing items
in a fixed order, the order is largely decided by how long it has been since you’ve played the move
in any of the training modes. Moves you haven’t yet seen at all are shown first (in the order dictated
by Learning priority order), and after no more unseen moves are left, the moves you had seen least
recently are shown. You will end up seeing every move in your repertoire if you continue to train in
this mode. Like review in order mode, items attempted in this mode will also impact spaced
repetition mode scheduling.

This mode can also be used to review an entire repertoire before a tournament, but can also
provide a way of refreshing moves that the spaced repetition system may have scheduled a long
way into the future, due to previous accurate performances, and that you may be starting to forget.
Any moves you’ve forgotten since last training them , and so marked wrong during training in this
mode will then be priotised for more rapid ongoing review within the spaced repetition system
when you return to using spaced repetition for training.

Note that context moves shown before a currently targeted move may be requested in the same
way they may be requested in spaced repetition mode. So while each target move follows the least
recent/unseen ordering rule, it is possible for you to be asked to play some context moves early if
the system decided they were already due for review now or soon into the future. Context removes
reviewed in this manner will be deemed to have been already reviewed as part of the current
sequence, and will not be requested again in this mode until you’ve seen all possible moves.


17.4.4. Training all repertoires

If you click on the folder holding the white or black repertoires before you start training, positions
will be taken from all the repertoires of that colour. NOTE: that with a high level repertoire
selected, some operations are not allowed, such as adding moves, or deleting lines. If you want to
remove moves or add new moves you’ll need to have a single repertoire selected first. If you are in
a high level grouping repertoire, and want to know which repertoire(s) a move comes from , you
can find that information in the candidate moves panel.


17.4.5. Resistant repertoires

Resistant moves are moves that you’ve been training for some time, but are still having trouble
consistently getting right. Once a move is deemed to be resistant, it will take more than one correct
answer in a row to move back to being non-resistant. While the spaced repetition system does a
reasonably good job of prioritizing moves you keep getting wrong, the resistant moves may still
need extra attention, especially if you are still getting them right sometimes, just not consistently
enough to indicate mastery has been achieved. To help prioritize your time on these types of



                                                                                                  173
moves, there are two specific global repertoires available in the repertoire tree that hold all the
white and black resistant moves. This allows you to select the resistant repertoire and then start
training in order to preferentially target scheduled moves that are proving difficult to master.


17.4.6. Transpositions

The underlying representation of your repertoire uses positions as the primary entity, rather than
explicit move orders. This allows a natural treatment of transpositions as moves are secondary to
positions and there is only one instance of each position, no matter how many repertoires or
transpositions it appears in. If a particular repertoire contains a transposition to another line
already stored elsewhere in the repertoire, the opening tree will not fill in a move branch for the
transposition. If you play the transposition move on the board the tree will jump to the
transposition position in the tree where the rest of the line will be presented.

Transpositions across repertoires are handled slightly differently. To avoid confusion, a move that
transposes from repertoire A to repertoire B will have the full line appear in both repertoires
within the opening tree. However, In both the single repertoire and cross repertoire transposition
cases there is only one representation of the position in the underlying repertoire data. It doesn’t
matter which path you reach a position from, once you’ve transposed into a line the learning stats
and spaced repetition scheduling treats the positions the same. So if you train moves in repertoire A
that are from positions that transposed to repertoire B you’ll get credit in both repertoires, because
in the internal representation the positions are the same.

The same is true for any overlap between multiple repertoires, not just transpositions. If you have
two repertoires that overlap, training in one will also impact the scheduling of the same moves in
any other repertoire in which the same position and move exists.


17.5. Syncing opening explorer stats
You can choose to add opening explorer statistics to your repertoire, which , as well as provide
extra information on each move, enables several other features, such as common positions first
learning prioritisation, colouring options in the opening tree and opening sunburst visualisations,
and extra sorting and filtering options in the move list table.

To initiate the opening explorer sync, click on the blue circle menu launcher under the board, and
select the sync explorer option. Several options are available for the sync:

Game Source
   Choose between our main chesstempo game database (the one containing OTB games, including
   master games), a recent snapshot of games played on the playing server (the last 3 million games
   matching the rating criteria), and your own games played on chesstempo. Each of these has
   different pros and cons. Using the main game database produces stats that reflect quality game
   play, especially if you choose a master level rating range for the rating filter. Stats based on move
   choices in master games will produce a better estimate of move quality than estimates extracted
   from games played on chesstempo or most likely your own games. Using data from chesstempo
   games will not reflect the high quality play of the OTB master games, but if you want to use the
   opening explorer data in conjunction with the common positions first option, the data may
   better reflect the positions you will experience when playing online, especially if you choose a



174
  rating range that reflects players of a strength you regularly play against. Choosing your own
  chesstempo games as the playing source provides game counts that are very specific to the lines
  you are playing in your online games, but may lack statistical power in low frequency lines.

Rating range
  The rating range for games used from the source database can be specified. Note that the
  narrower the range , the fewer games will be available , and while setting a higher minimum
  rating number will increase the quality of the games, and so the reliability of the win/loss based
  stats for moves with sufficient games, it will also reduce the total games and so decrease the
  statistical power of the less common positions.

Only add explorer stats to moves without existing values
  This option controls if syncing will overwrite any existing values already synced on previous
  syncs. The option is off by default, which means any old values on moves found to have stats on
  the current sync will be overwritten. If you’d prefer to keep old values in preference over new
  values, then turn this option on.

Clear explorer stats from non-matched moves
  This option controls what happens to moves that are not found to have any explorer data (i.e no
  matching games) in the current sync. By default this option is on, and such moves will have any
  existing stats cleared. If you want to keep stats on non-matching moves then turn this option off.
  An example of a situation where you may want to turn this option off is if you want to sync from
  several game sources. For example if you want to use the 'common positions' learning priority
  option, then you may want to first sync with the main database, then the CT playing database,
  and then finally your own CT games, thus ensuring that the common positions first option will at
  least use moves played in any matching games across all 3 sources in preference to moves in
  games not found in any source. To do this you would need to turn off the 'clear explorer stats for
  non-matches moves' option for each of your 3 syncs. You can also use a combination of either
  the order of syncing or use the "Only add explorer stats to moves without existing values" option
  to control which stats source is preferred if stats are available for a move from all 3 sources.
  Note that if you want to prioritise based on the count of your own games over other sources,
  then you probably want to sync that source first, and only after running out of moves with
  explorer data from your own games, syncing one or both of the other sources, otherwise the
  larger counts from the main game db and chesstempo games sources will overwhelm the
  numbers in your own games, prioritising based on master games and CT games first.


               To avoid excessive load on the server, only one opening explorer sync per game
               source type can be performed every few minutes.


               You will need to manually reload the opening trainer after the sync has completed
               in order to make use of the synced data.


               This is a desktop only feature until the next app update.




                                                                                                 175
17.6. Syncing engine evals
Using the sync evals feature you can fill in pre-processed engine evaluations for your repertoire
moves. Having evals synced with your moves allows extra colouring options for opening tree
colouring and opening sunburst visualisation colouring , as well as sorting options on the move list
table and a bulk disable based on engine evals.

Chesstempo has a large cache of pre-cached engine evaluation for many opening positions of
varying depths. We have been using a portion of our idle cloud engine servers to analyse the most
common opening positions at high depth (depth 50 using Stockfish). We’ve been running this high
depth analysis for over a year, but such depth takes around half a day for each position, so even
with many engines processing these requests in parallel there is still a lot of work to be done to
cover all common positions. We also have opening position evaluations cached from some of the
cloud engine analysis done by users of our cloud engine features, that is often of lower depth
(although occasionally higher depth analysis is also available). We have also recently released a
feature for diamond members that allows them to request bulk analysis of their repertoires at
depth 25, and once cached this analysis is also available to other members.

To start the engine eval sync, click on the blue circle menu launcher under the board, and select the
sync evals option. Several options are available for the sync: Only add evals to moves without
existing evaluations:: Use this option to preserve any existing evaluations. Because you can
manually add engine evals or export them via PGN when importing a repertoire from PGN you may
want to use this option to make sure pre-cached evaluations do not override your hand chosen
evaluations. The option is on by default, if you want to overwrite existing evals during the sync,
turn this option off. Minimum engine depth to use:: Only sync pre-cached engine evaluations that
were analysed to at least this depth.


              To avoid excessive load on the server, only one eval sync can be performed every
              few minutes.


              You will need to manually reload the opening trainer after the sync has completed
              in order to make use of the synced data.


              This is a desktop only feature until the next app update.



17.7. Repertoire engine analysis
The sync evals feature provides repertoire engine data for positions that already have pre-existing
engine analysis. Diamond members also have access to a feature that provides engine analysis for
all moves in a repertoire, filling in the gaps for moves that don’t already have pre-cached analysis.
To use the engine analysis feature right click on any move in the opening tree panel and choose the
'analyse line' option. If you want to analyse the entire repertoire, click on the top level move to
analyse the entire tree. In order to manage load on our cloud engine servers, there is a 5000 daily
quota on moves analysed. Analysis is done with the Stockfish engine to depth 25. Note that the
quota only applies to moves that don’t already have at least depth 25 evaluations cached, and with
average sized repertoires, 5000 moves may be enough to cover all moves without prior evaluation
in one day. Over time, as more moves are cached, we expect the 5000 limit to be sufficient to


176
analyse entire repertoires in the vast majority of cases, with only those with an unusually large
number of novel positions needing to spread the analysis out over more than one day.

If you do need to analyse over several days, you can analyse again from the top level move in your
repertoire, and the system knows which moves have already been analysed and will only look at
the yet-to-analysed moves in subsequent analysis requests (i.e you don’t need to remember which
part of the tree you have already asked for analysis on). If you want to monitor how the analysis is
going, you can request another analysis, and you’ll get feedback on how many items are still in the
queue waiting to be processed (as well as details on the remaining quota for the day).

Once all positions have been analysed (requesting a new analysis will tell you if that is the case),
you need to use the sync evals feature to initiate the final sync of the processed moves with your
repertoire, after a page reload you will then be able to visualise the opening tree and opening
sunburst using the eval colouring method, and sort the move table based on evaluations.


               This is a desktop only feature until the next app update.



17.8. Opening sunburst repertoire visualisation
The opening sunburst provides a method of visualising your opening repertoire and various
metrics such as engine evaluations , opening explorer stats and spaced repetition learning metrics.
It lays out your repertoire in a radial tree layout which allows a more compact overview than can
be provided by the opening tree. To launch the sunburst click on the eye icon in the header of the
opening tree panel.

If your repertoire is of a reasonable size only a sample of the entire repertoire will be displayed,
with priority given to moves whose sub-branch is a larger percentage of the total repertoire. You
can click on any move in the sunburst to make that move the centre of the sunburst, thus drilling
down into the move’s sub-lines. Clicking on any move will also jump to the position in the opening
tree.

The board in the centre of the sunburst shows the position after the move currently hovered over
with the mouse. The full line for the hovered move is shown below the board, along with the
opening name, and opening explorer stats and engine eval if available. The spaced repetition based
statistics for moves you’ve attempted at least once will be shown towards the top of the sunburst
when hovering over the move.

If you’d like to return to the previous set of data after drilling into a move by clicking on it, then you
can zoom back out by clicking on the board in the centre of the sunburst. Subsequent clicks on the
board will continue to zoom back out until you reach the initial position again. If you’ve drilled
several moves down and want to jump back to the start position quickly, use shift-click to achieve
that. There is a resize handle in the bottom right of the sunburst if you need to resize, please note
that you may have trouble making out the moves when a smaller size is used, if that’s the case you
may want to change the "Maximum rings in sunburst" setting to limit the total rings displayed at a
time.

You can click on the settings icon in the top left corner on the sunburst to configure the sunburst
evaluation, available settings are:



                                                                                                      177
Colouring Method
  The colouring method determines how the move segments in the sunburst are coloured, the
  options include:

  Engine evaluation
      Colour the moves based on engine evaluation from the point of view of the repertoire colour,
      so if the repertoire is from black’s point of view for example, moves the engine think give the
      edge to black will be coloured green (or blue if the colour blind friendly option is used), and
      red if the position is considered good for white. the larger the advantage (or disadvantage)
      the darker the colour will become, and the smaller the advantage the lighter the colouring,
      with white showing even positions. Positions that currently lack engine evaluation are shown
      in grey. See syncing engine evals for instructions on syncing evaluations to the moves for use
      in colouring.

  Opening Explorer win rate
      Colours the moves based on the win rate in the opening explorer data synced to the move
      from the point of view of the repertoire colour. The colouring method is similar to the eval
      colouring with win-rates favouring the repertoire colour shown in green (or blue) and moves
      not favouring the repertoire colour shown in red. moves with no opening explorer stats
      available are shown in grey. See the syncing opening explorer stats section for more details
      on connecting opening explorer stats data to the moves.

  Opening Explorer performance rating
      Similar to the opening explorer win rate option, but using the performance rating for the
      move, colouring is based on the performance rating for each move compared to the average
      rating of the players that played it, so moves that perform above average will be coloured
      green/blue vs moves that perform below average being coloured red. Note the colouring for
      this option takes the 'first mover advantage' setting into consideration. This is to adjust for the
      natural advantage white has over black in the opening, and avoids having all black openings
      coloured as 'slightly bad'. The default value for this normalisation uses a 35 rating points
      adjustment bonus for black openings, if you’d prefer a raw performance rating without the
      adjustment, set it to 0 in your settings.

  Line separation
      This simply attempts to colour different lines with different colours, providing some visual
      separation of different lines in your repertoire on the sunburst, but without using any
      performance metrics.

  Accuracy
      This colours moves based on your accuracy during opening training. More accurate moves
      will be coloured green/blue, less accurate moves red. Moves you’ve never attempted will be
      coloured grey.

  Correct sequence
      This colours moves based on the number of times you have got them correct in a row while
      training. The longer the correct sequence the greener/bluer the move will be, the shorter the
      sequence the more red the move will be. Moves you’ve never attempted will be coloured grey.




178
   Last seen
      Colours moves based on how recently you’ve seen them. Recently seen moves will be
      green/blue and less recently seen will be red. Moves you’ve never attempted will be coloured
      grey.

   Next scheduled
      Colours moves on when they are due for their next review. Moves due further into the future
      will be shown in green/blue, moves due soon will be red. Moves you’ve never attempted will
      be coloured grey.

   Attempt count
      Colours moves based on the number of times you have seen them relative to other moves.
      The more times you have seen them, the greener/bluer the moves will be , the less often , the
      more red they will be. Moves you’ve never attempted will be coloured grey.

First mover advantage in Elo
   The estimated advantage to white in the opening in rating points. Used to normalise the
   performance rating colouring to factor out white’s inherent advantage in the opening. Set this to
   0 if you’d prefer an unadjusted view.

Maximum rings in sunburst
   The maximum number of concentric circles shown in the sunburst. A smaller number may be
   useful on smaller screens. In general smaller numbers provide a less cluttered output, but
   provide a more high level overview, with less of the data visible at once.

Bad→Good colour range
   The default metric based colour range uses a Red to Green range (with white in the middle
   showing a neutral metric). If you have trouble differentiating colours in this range due to issues
   with colour blindness you can switch to the Red to Blue option which should provide more
   differentiation for those with Red/Green differentiation issues. Note we may be replace this
   option in the future with a system wide setting once we start offering other colour blind friendly
   options for other parts of the site.

There is also an opening trainer wide setting on the opening trainer advanced settings that controls
the opening explorer based stats, and can be used to set a minimum number of games before a stat
will be used, this can be useful for the win/rate, and opening performance rating colouring methods
as smaller game numbers can produce misleading colouring due to small sample sizes, so
considering using this setting (which is off by default) if you find low-sample size colours confusing.


               This is a desktop only feature until the next app update.



17.9. Move list table
The move list table provides a linear list of all the moves in your repertoire. Providing data on each
move such as the engine evaluation and opening explorer stats (where available) and the spaced
repetition learning metrics for each move. The move list table can be launched by first selecting the
start of the branch you want to exam (use the top level move if you want to see all moves in your



                                                                                                   179
repertoire) and then click on the list icon in the header panel of the opening tree. Once launched
click on the headers of the table to sort by those metrics, and click on the settings icon in the top left
of the table to access settings and filters for the table. The forward/back arrows next to the settings
button moves forward and backwards one move at a time in the table, selecting the move in the
opening tree (or you can click directly on a move in the table to jump to that position in the tree).

By combining sorting (via clicking on column headers) and the available filters the move list can be
used to identify important aspects of your repertoire. For example if you want to review all the bad
moves (according to Stockfish) in your repertoire click on the eval header to toggle between sorting
by increasing or decreasing eval. This allows you to have the worst moves shown first in the list.
You may also want select the 'only show our moves' setting, to focus on moves of your colour that
the engine thinks are poor. You can then tarverse through the list of bad moves and decide if you
want to keep them in your repertoire, or replace them with better options. Similar filtering can be
done with opening explorer based settings. You can also zero in on move you are performing
poorly at in spaced repetition by sorting by those columns.

Another example of using the move list table is to find moves where you might get the most benefit
from extending the line further. If you enable the "only show end-of-line" moves option, and then
sort by the "opex #" column (i.e the number of times the move appeared in the opening explorer
data that was synced with your repertoire) then you can see which lines ended in positions that
were still very common according to the opening explorer data, and these positions may provide
good extension points, as they are more likely to come up in actual play, so extending the line
further is more likely to provide a return on your learning time investment than extending a line
that rarely comes up. When using explorer based stats, you may also want to filter based on the
minimum explorer games setting to completely avoid seeing moves with less than minimum
number of moves.

By default the move list table will also show disabled moves, but you can hide those by enabling the
'hide disabled moves' option in the move list table settings.


               This is a desktop only feature until the next app update.



17.10. Bulk disable moves
If you have already synced engine evals and/or opening explorer stats with your repertoire (and
subsequently reloaded the page) you will be able to disable moves in your repertoire that do not
meet a minimum engine eval target or number of games played in the opening explorer stats.

To initiate the bulk disable first click on the first move in opening tree of the branch in your
repertoire you want to disable (click on the first move if you want to consider the entire repertoire
for disabling). Then click on the blue circle menu launcher under the board, and select the bulk
disable option. Choose the pawn evaluation threshold and/or the minimum number of games the
move has been played in for the disabling criteria (any move worse than the stated eval threshold
or played less number of times in the opening explorer stats will be disabled). You can also choose
to disable moves of either colour or just your own moves. Only moves from the currently selected
repertoire will be considered for disabling.

This option can be useful for reducing a very large repertoire down to the essential lines for



180
memorisation based on how likely you are to see them in your actual games. Disabled moves
remain in the tree for instrucitonal purposes, but are not included in training.


17.11. Move details
When paused or not in training mode, details about the move just played are shown under the
board, this includes: - Accuracy - Last time the move was seen - Number of times the move was
wrong or correct in a row. - When it is next scheduled - The mistake history for the move, which
shows all the incorrect moves that have been made in the current position and their frequency and
most recent date played. Note: This only applies to moves made after the 25th of April 2020, and
currently only collects mistakes made on the desktop version, the apps will also track mistakes after
the next update. - Engine evaluation of the move if available (see the syncing engine evals section). -
Opening explorer stats for the move if available (see the syncing opening explorer stats section).


17.12. Personal comments panel
Any comments you have made on a position or move in the comment panel, or comments imported
automatically from a PGN import will be made visible in the personal comments panel. You can
control when these items will be visible via the 'Show our move comments' setting in the opening
trainer settings panel.


17.13. Board annotations
You can draw arrows and highlight squares on the main opening trainer board using right click
(square highlight) or right click and drag (draw arrow), combined with Ctrl/Shift/Alt key combos for
choosing the colour of the square or arrow.

These board annotations can be permanently saved on the move for this position by pressing the 's'
key after you’ve finished making the required graphical annotations, and will be available when
traversing the move list and included any PGN exports.


               This is currently a desktop only feature, viewing board annotations (but not
               creating them) will be made available on the app in a future update.



17.14. Play online integration
When you have one or more opening repertoires created, they will be used after each game you
play on Chesstempo to provide feedback on where the game deviates from your repertoire. A
deviation will be either where you play a move that was different than the one recommended in
your repertoire, or your opponent plays a move that you don’t have in your repertoire yet. You can
choose to add new moves via the opening explorer without leaving the playing page, or launch the
opening training page with the relevant repertoire selected.


17.15. Opening training settings
To launch the settings panel, click on the blue circle menu launcher under the board, and select the



                                                                                                     181
settings option.


17.15.1. Basic settings

Learning mode
   Choose between the different methods of deciding which items to train, either Spaced repetition,
   Review in order or Least recent/unseen first. (Note: Desktop only until next app update)

Pause at end of line
   While training, don’t show the next move automatically after reaching the end of a line. You can
   also choose to pause after any move by using the pause button under the board, allowing you to
   review comments etc without automatically moving on to the next move.

Preview moves in new lines
   Show the correct move via an arrow in all new positions.

Preview moves wrong on last attempt
   Show the correct move via an arrow if it was wrong on the last attempt.

Preview moves in all lines
   Show the correct move via an arrow before all moves.

Candidate moves as arrows when not training
   When not in training mode, use arrows to show the current candidate moves in the position, the
   main line move will be shown as a purple arrow, other candidate moves as grey arrows. (Note:
   Desktop only until next app update)

Top explorer move as arrow when not training
   When not in training mode, use an orange arrow to show the most popular move in the position
   according to the opening explorer. If the top explorer move is also the main line move, and
   candidate move arrows is turned on then the orange arrow will be shown with a purple border,
   indicating the main line move is also the most popular move. If the top explorer move is an non-
   main line candidate move then it will be shown with a grey border. (Note: Desktop only until
   next app update)

Show our move comments
   Your own move comments (either made by you in the comment panel, or imported from PGN
   when creating your repertoire) are shown in the personal comments panel under conditions
   decided by this option. You can choose to have comments shown only when not training, always
   (so both training and non-training), never or in situations where the move is previewed. The
   latter includes several cases, such as when showing a previously wrong move, showing a new
   move you haven’t seen yet, or when training might be paused such as when a mistake was just
   made or a line has reached the end. When not training is the default. When your own comments
   are shown in training in a situation where the system is currently expecting you to play a move,
   then the comment will be shown for the move to play rather than move just played, which is
   different to the all comments list panel which always shows comments for the move just played.
   (Note: Desktop only until next app update)




182
Learning priority
  How new moves are moved from the as yet unseen moves into the learning set. 'Main lines first'
  takes moves from main lines first and sidelines later. 'Breadth over depth' mode takes all moves
  at depth 1 first then moves on to all moves at depth 2, continually increasing the depth until all
  moves have been added to the learning set. This setting is also used to decide the move order in
  Review in order mode and the order in which unseen items are selected in the Least
  recent/unseen first mode.

Maximum learning depth
  The maximum depth to train moves to. Default to unlimited, entering 0 for the depth will revert
  back to unlimited. Note that the global training graphs will always use unlimited depth for stats
  display, even if a depth limit has been requested.


17.15.2. Spaced repetition settings

Sort due items by
  When the spaced repetition system has several items that are due for presentation, this option
  decides what order they will be presented in. "Variation" means due items will be sorted by
  variation, "Due date" will sort the items by when they are due. Variation is the default option
  and will lead to less jumping around in your repertoire, especially if your repertoire is large.
  However if you are having trouble completing all items each day, you may want to switch to
  "Due date" which will prioitise the items that are most overdue first. Note that using "Variation"
  mode means wrong moves will not be scheduled until you either finish the due items that were
  scheduled at the start of the session or you reinitialise the repertoire by reloading the page or
  clicking between different repertoires. (Note: Desktop only until next app update)

Sort undue items by variation window
  When using the sort due items by variation option, this value dictates how many hours into the
  future any undue items will be included in the sorting. For example if the value is set to 24 hours
  then you can continue solving against problems due up to 24 hours into the future, and still have
  them sorted by variation. Once the window has been passed, if you continue to train when there
  are 0 due items then they will be selected purely on the order they are due, which may mean
  you jump between variations. The default value is 0 hours, which disables including undue
  problems in the variation-based sorting, but if you often solve when due = 0 and would like to
  keep variation based sorting, at least for the items due soon, then change this setting so the
  window is large enough to reflect what you consider to be 'soon'.

Gap growth factor
  The gap growth factor dictates how quickly moves you get correct are pushed into the future. If
  the gap growth is 2 for example and you get the item correct after having previously got it
  correct 4 days ago, then the next presentation will be scheduled in 2*4 days = 8 days. If you
  choose 1.5 as the gap factor then it would have been scheduled in 1.5*4 days = 6 days. If you feel
  you are forgetting moves before the next review (and you are solving all due problems each
  day), you may want to decrease the growth factor. If you are remembering items ok, but feeling
  overwhelmed by the total number of problems due each day, try increasing the gap factor
  beyond the default 2.0 value in order to more quickly push correct items into the future.




                                                                                                 183
Max Days into the future
  The maximum number of days the spaced repetition system will allow an item to be scheduled
  into the future. The bigger this number is , the easier it becomes to manage the learning load in a
  very large repertoire. However if it is too large you may find yourself forgetting items. The
  current default is 1095 days (3 years).

Mistake Reschedule time
  The number of minutes into the future to schedule a mistake move. Defaults to 0.5 minutes (30
  seconds). Note this doesn’t mean it will be automatically shown in 30 seconds, as there may be
  other items already scheduled before it, it simply means its due date will be 30 seconds from
  now.

Initial Correct Scheduled time
  The first time you get an item correct it will be scheduled this number of minutes into the future.
  The default value is 1440 minutes (1 day) into the future.

Preview reschedule time
  If a move triggered preview treatment (for example , you had got it wrong previously and had
  the preview wrong moves option on), then it will be scheduled more quickly into the future
  using the default setting of 1 minute. The reason being that a move shown in preview mode has
  basically given you the correct solution, so we don’t have any extra information on how well you
  know the move, placing it beyond the end of the already scheduled items gives the system a
  chance to check your memory further towards the end of the current session.


17.15.3. Advanced settings

Consider leadup moves when training branch
  If turned on, then when training a branch, context moves leading directly from the branch point
  up to the start position will be considered as training targets if they meet reinforcement or
  scheduling criteria. Currently off by default.

Reinforce minimum correct
  If we choose a move for training that has earlier context moves in the move list with less than
  the "Reinforce minimum correct" number of correct attempts in a row, then that move will be
  tested before testing the target move, even if it is not scheduled yet.

Reinforce minimum days
  This is similar to the 'Reinforce minimum correct' setting, in that if a move leading up to the
  target move is scheduled within 'Reinforce minimum days' number of days then the move will
  be tested before moving on to the target move. If you’d like the spaced repetition system to force
  you to play all context moves, then you can set either this number or the reinforce minimum
  correct number to a very large number which will trigger reinforcement on all leadup items. We
  don’t recommend this choice, as it will take much longer to learn your repertoire if you are
  forced to continually play moves you know well, but some users prefer this style of training, and
  it can be useful in smaller repertoires. Setting both the the values to 0 with disable
  reinforcement and only context moves that are due or about to be due will be used as training
  targets.




184
Don’t show start moves threshold
  When deciding how many context moves to show before the current target move, skip
  displaying any previous moves that have already been solved at least this number of times
  correct in a row.

Move speed adjustment
  Controls the speed at which context moves are played. 1.0 uses the default speed. Values under 1
  speed up the piece movement, values over 1 slow it down. So for example 0.5 would make the
  speed twice as fast as the default value of 1.0, and 5.0 would make the speed 5 times as slow.
  Note that the base speed is also controlled by how well learnt a particular move may be, so very
  well learnt context moves will be played faster than less well learnt moves.

Use fixed piece movement speed
  By default, leadup context moves are played at a speed determined by how well you know the
  move, combined with the move speed adjustment setting. If you’d like a fixed amount of time for
  each move animation where the base speed is determined by the board settings piece movement
  speed instead of learning data, then turn this item on. The speed adjustment factor setting will
  still be used, but it will applied to the board settings for piece speed instead of the speed chosen
  by your learning history. NOTE: This does not change the speed of moves that match the "don’t
  show start move threshold" criteria, if you’d like all moves from the start position played at your
  preferred speed, you will also need to change that setting to a very large number in order to turn
  off start move skipping.

Engine eval output style
  By default engine evaluations for repertoire moves are output from the point of view of white,
  that is a positive evaluation is good for white (and bad for black), and a negative evaluation is
  bad for white (and good for black). It may be clearer in some contexts to view evaluations from
  the point of view of the repertoire colour, so for example in a black repertoire, positive
  evaluations are good for black, and negative evaluations are bad for black. If you’d prefer a
  repertoire colour based view, you can change the setting here from white based to repertoire
  colour based.

Opening tree colouring method
  The moves in the opening tree can be coloured using several metrics. The colouring methods are
  the same as those used in the opening sunburst visualisation, please see the sunburst colouring
  settings section for a more detailed description of the colouring options available.

Explorer game threshold
  When move colouring methods are used (for either the opening tree moves or the opening
  sunburst visualisation) that rely on opening explorer stats you can choose to set the minimum
  number of explorer games for a move to use the explorer colouring, if the threshold is not met
  then grey colouring will be used to indicate 'no explorer data available'. This option is useful in
  avoiding the use of colouring for moves that may have misleading colours applied due to their
  stats being sourced from a small sample of games.




                                                                                                  185
17.16. Opening tree
The opening tree shows all the moves for the currently selected repertoire (or repertoires when a
global repertoire like all white repertoires is selected). Clicking on any move will jump to that move
on the board, with the moves required to lead to that position shown in the move list. You can start
training moves below any position in the tree by clicking on a move and then clicking on the
[ Train branch ] button.

Moves can be deleted by right clicking on any move in the tree and selecting the delete option. That
move and all moves under it will be deleted. On mobile devices right click can be simulated by
pressing and holding on the relevant move in the tree.


               Note if you are deleting a line that other moves could have transposed into you
               will also be truncating those transposition lines as you will be removing the moves
               from the line they transposed into. If you want to delete a line holding transposed
               moves that you would like to preserve, then promote the truncated tranposing line
               first, and this will move the following moves into the promoted transposing line
               and out of the line you plan to delete. You can then delete the moves left in the
               demoted line (which will now be marked as the truncated transposing line)
               without losing the moves that are now attached to the newly promoted
               transposition destination line.


Parts of the opening tree can also be disabled or enabled by right clicking on the move, and
selecting the enable or disable line option. Disabling allows you to keep lines in your repertoire that
will not be trained, and can be useful for example when you may want to list moves for your own
colour that are poor, with comments explaining why the move should be avoided. You may also
want to temporarily disable lines during training if you are not currently planning to play them,
but may want to do so in the future.

Lines can be copied from one repertoire to another by again right clicking on the move to start the
copy from, and then choosing the Copy line option. The destination repertoire will be prompted for
after the option is selected, after the copy the line will exist in both the original and destination
repertoires. When copying, it is the sub-tree under the selected move that will be copied. In
addition, the moves from the selected move up to the root of the opening tree will also be copied to
ensure the destination repertoire has a branch on which to attach the copied sub-tree.


